Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Marina
Garcia Granero. She's an assistant professor of moral philosophy
at the University of Valencia. Last time we talked
about some aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy like Zoun, the
Uberman race, biopolitics. Today, we're talking about some other
aspects of his philosophy like the genealogical method, the
death of God, nihilism, and some other related topics.
So, Marina, welcome back to the show, uh to
the show. It's always a pleasure to have you
everyone.
Thank you for having me. It's good to be
back on the show.
So let's start with the genealogical method then. What
are, what are the goals of it?
So genealogy has become a prominent method in contemporary
philosophy. It serves as a deconstructive or narrative approach
to explore the origins of beliefs, concepts, values, practices,
for instance, the notions of truth, altruism, justice, and
it has gained particular recognition as an anti-essentialist tool.
It's especially useful for social and political critique, however,
Nietzsche's approach to genealogy has deeper nuances and distinctive
characteristics that make it unique. And differentiate it from,
let's say the popular understanding that we have now.
Evidently, Nietzsche did not coin the term genealogy. It
comes from the natural sciences. Think of the genealogical
tree or arrangement, but he did pioneer the genealogical
method as a philosophical tool. Genealogy as a philosophical
method clearly stated. So he presented it as a
richer and more nuanced uh method than the. Historical
approaches from English genealogist, the English evolutionists, and it's
actually quite funny because he always labels and calls
his, he, he calls them the English even when
they're not English like Paulre, he was German but
he called him English. So, and Nietzsche himself uh
in Human to human, a book from the Mid
period, uh, as it is well known. He was
influenced by these authors and he undertook a history
of the emergence of thought, it's long phrase, but.
What he meant is that what I mean here
is that he was deeply inspired by this evolutionary
framework and inquiry, but by the time he later
wrote uh on the genealogy of morals, his genealogy
becomes a counterpoint to evolutionary histories, evolutionary genealogies, so.
He shares with uh these thinkers, uh, he, he,
he, he also rejects metaphysics, essentialism. He, he cares
about uh unraveling the extra moral origins of morality
to be, uh, and by these authors I'm referring
to Herbert Spencer, Alfred Spias, Jean Marie Guillo, and
I also already said Pare and Walter Budget. I
did mention him in our first interview because Uh,
he also, he became familiar with the notion of
hut breeding with that author. So what I'm saying
is that he becomes, uh, he's truly inspired by
these authors, but then he emancipates himself from them.
He presents a different project. So in Nietzsche's framework,
genealogy, uh, has. 22 different goals that that are
deeply connected and the two goals are necessary. It
has two distinct steps. So the first step is
shared, it is common with the English evolutionist. It's,
it's the, I already mentioned history of the genesis
of thought and so Nietzsche wants to understand how
ideas and cultures are created and sustained. It's like
the genealogical tree of Christian values, uh, European societies,
etc. ETC. But the second more critical step is
original to Nietzsche, and he questions the value of
values, the value of these ideas, these practices, these
institutions, and this second step is what distinguishes a
genuine genealogy from a mere history of morality. Uh
THIS second step is what makes a genealogy worthy
of its name. So paradoxically, for Nietzsche, the English
genealogists do not deserve that name. So And uh
he, he acknowledges their contribution, for example, at the
beginning of the genealogy of morals in the preface,
but then he tempers his initial praise with criticism
because their account lacks philosophical rigor. He, he denounces
that these authors, the English genealogist, and mostly Herbert
Spencer. Continue to affirm and legitimize the same crystal
values, Christian values under a new guise, a new
scientific guise, and so. Uh, INSTEAD of subjecting them
to uh critical scrutiny, instead of analyzing them, contesting
them, uh, they still legitimize them, for example, the,
the utility of altruism from a revolutionary perspective. It's
the same value but through a new lens and
so. Let's say that Nietzsche's genealogy has an evolutionary
inspiration, let's say or basis, but it introduces a
critical dimension in the second step, the second goal
that is particular to it. And so, uh, the
history of thought by itself stops short of evaluating
the value of values and that's where Nietzsche drew
the line. So in fact, he criticized, he wrote,
they still believe in values just like the Christian,
they still have the same relation to values. So,
uh, instead, and I'm doing with this, Nietzsche, he
critically examines how values are transmitted and maintained across
cultures and through power structures and whether it's worth
preserving them, for example, why is it that Christian.
And values have become so successful and pervasive for
centuries that for him is a crucial question for
genealogy, not so much how did they arise, but
why is it that still persists today and is
it worth it?
And so how do these goals of the genealogical
method relate to nihilism?
So as I was saying, uh, genealogy as a
method builds on the philosophical ideas of Darwinism and
it pushes back against the idea that species are
eternal, for example, it assumes that humans are deeply
connected to nature, it rejects explanation based on final
causes, final purposes and genealogy, let's say that. Uh,
IT incorporates the philosophical consequences of Darwinism, that's what
I want to say, and this also includes rejecting
the argument that God's existence could be proven by
looking at the design of the world, so. When
evolutionary thinking gained traction in the 19th century, it
started to chip away at the authority of religion
and morality, and over time this led to their
decline and even self destruction and for this reason,
genealogy ties to nihilism because it makes us question
our values and it redefines our relationship to morality
from transcendence to eminence. When values stop feeling absolute
or unquestionable. They become things we can actually discuss
and even change and by showing that our beliefs,
our habits and values come from human to human
origins, genealogy contributes to this loss of the sacred
or the divine and here's the twist. Socratic philosophy
and Christian morality with their focus on truthfulness and
the pursuit of truth, they planted the seed for
this own unraveling, this uh nihilism or More precisely
the event of the death of God because this
truthfulness, this will to truth gave us the drive
for knowledge, the same drive that uh for example
with uh new evolutionary discoveries. Ended up undermining them,
undermining uh the moral Christian hypothesis, creationism, etc. ETC.
And so in fact this is what Nietzsche meant
by the sentence God is death, the God is
death, and we have killed him. This is what
he truly adds to Hegel's previous declaration on the
death of God, the ideals of good, truth and
beauty. That once served as our guiding principles are
now exposed as illusions. They're no longer able to
shield us from the deeper realization of nihilism so
ironically it's the same way to truth that led
to the collapse of these ideas and the profound
existential shift that we're now facing. Christian religion, in
fact, would probably have experienced a different faith. If
it hadn't promoted such an attachment to truth or
aesthetic values.
And what is the death of God?
Well, the death of God, the way I see
it is best understood as a cultural event in
beginning in late 19th century Europe, and I want
to stress this word event. To mean that is,
it is historically and uh locally uh situated because
there is uh A tendency to conflate to treat
nihilism in the death of God as synonymous, and
they're not. We could say that the death of
God is an event while nihilism uh refers to
many things. NIHILISM uh is part of a human
condition refers also to. Type of ideas, etc. I'm
sure we will talk later about that, but so.
The thing about the death of God is that
it's not about whether you or I or anyone
listening chooses to believe our God in God or
not. It's not a question of personal faith or
theoretical atheism. Instead it reflects a deeper collective issue.
It's the collapse of the principles that once gave
a structure and meaning to life. It's the collapse
of the foundations of our Christian societies. So the
fact is that the idea of God as the
ultimate metaphysical and moral principle. No longer works as
a collective anchor for our politics, societies of values.
Those values have lost their strength or credibility, or
at least part of it. And so The death
of God as an event, it manifests as a
sense of aimlessness, a kind of cultural disorientation because
those Christian values have lost their authority, their power
to orient ourselves and our society, so. The metaphysical
hypothesis of God no longer provides the same security
or the same collective consolation. This idea of consolation
plays a major role in nihilism. So also interestingly.
The death of God doesn't happen because life is
falling apart. It's quite the opposite. It happens because
things are going relatively well. We have major advances
in science, technology, social stability, even material prosperity. And
Nietzsche notes this in the Lezerheide, which is his
most extensive and systematic treatment of nihilism. It's a
posthumous fragment from 1886 and it's famously known as
Lesser Haidee because of the location in Switzerland where
it was written. And so in that fragment nietzsche
states we can now bear a significant reduction in
the value of money because we enjoy relative prosperity
and culture and so the very success of these
advancements as I was saying at the beginning, science,
etc. The economy that undermines the need for uh
the sustain that God provided, the traditional foundations of
our culture.
Uh, AND how do people react to this experience
of the death of God?
Well, the death of God is a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, it can, it can be
experienced as a liberation and for instance, in contemporary
philosophy, the school has emphasized this result of liberation.
With the breakdown of transcendence and traditional values, there
is obviously an opportunity for autonomy, to experiment, to
develop our individuality. And so the death of God
as an event pushes us to recognize that meaning
isn't inherent in the world, meaning, meaning is a
human creation that we introduce into the world. It's
not something to be found, it's something to be
created and meaning is not something that corresponds with
the external world like truth in the. Correspondence account.
But what I mean is that meaning is fictitious.
It, it opens up a space. For different narrations,
world musics, stories, and so. Before the death of
God, there was no space for pluralism. So these
are positive outcomes from uh the event. Modern manifestations
of morality are more pluralistic, religion is less dogmatic,
philosophy is more critical. And so after the death
of God people gain power over how they interpret
and live in the world, but on the other
hand, the death of God is dangerous because it's
not just Christian morality that's affected. Political institutions such
as democracy are also impacted because Christian values such
as altruism and love of thy neighbor were the
ones legitimizing those institutions and so. When those values,
political values, social values, moral values lose their divine
foundation, it might create a sense of endlessness that
can affect not just individuals but entire communities. It's
what I was saying before, the death of God
is not about atheism as a personal question, but
the collective role played by the thought of God,
the foundation of the God. So. Nihilism, and the
event of the death of God, it's not just
a personal crisis, it has profound implications for society
as a whole. Now that our ideals have been
exposed as human constructs, human constructs. Without the divine
quarantine, it, it, it forces us to confront the
fragility of meaning. In fact, Nietzsche uses very striking
language to describe the death of God in pharmacological
terms, also in the lenser high death fragment. He
explains that Christian morality acted as a kind of
pharmaon, a term that means both poison and remedy.
So Christian morality prevented humanity from falling into despair,
into rejecting life life or succumbing into nihilism, so.
Christian morality kept us going by giving us a
sense of purpose and meaning, but after the death
of God, that antidote is gone and so the
symptoms of despair can worsen. But at the same
time, as I already mentioned, there's potential for recovery
and emancipation. So The death of God is both
a challenge and an opportunity, and I'm not saying
either or, it's both. There are valid reasons for
each reaction. It's both a liberation and a catastrophic
event. It can lead us to despair, suffering, and
sense of loss. Uh, WE might feel a sense
of dependency. We don't know where to turn for
meaning, but on the other hand, it can spark
critical discussions about morality, values, emotions, and this is
something Nietzsche had in mind with his idea of
the transvaluation of values. He aimed at the complete
re-evaluation of how we live.
So, let's talk now a little bit about nihilism.
What is nihilism and since we've just talked about
the death of God, is it synonymous with the
death of God or are there any differences here?
So the death of God, as I just said,
is an event, but it's just part one part
or stage of a much broader concept or history
of nihilism so nihilism isn't limited to the death
of God. It includes. Other phenomena previous stages before
the event of the death of God, for example,
Greek pessimism or uh Christian religion as a nihilistic
idea. So it's crucial not to reduce nihilism to
the death of God. It's just one stage in
the longer history of nihilism, for instance, and I
just uh read about this. In a chapter for
a collecting volume on uh on mimeticos and on
nihilism and mimetic studies, uh, Rene Giga, uh, the
founder of mimetic theory, Reneiga, his interpretation of nihilism
is very problematic because he reduces it to the
event of, of the death of God and this
oversimplifies niss deeper insights into our nihilistic condition, so.
The fact is that uh Nietzsche actually presents, present
the nihilism in different layers and we need to
consider all of them to fully grasp what he
means by it. So one way to think about
this comes from the work of a prominent niche
scholar Paul van Toeren. And his book Nietzsche and
European nihilism, and there he argues that Nietzsche conceptualizes
nihilism in at least 3 stages, each marking a
distinct phase in the evolution of nihilistic thought. And
to really grab nihilism, we have to look at
all these stages and Van Tongeren, he actually speaks
also about 1/4 stage, but let's stick to the
first three. So the thing is that The first
layer of nihilism. Uh, IS the absolute lack of
meaning in the world. Uh, THE great example of
this is Greek pessimism. In the 5th century before
our era, so Nietzsche sees uh Greek culture, uh
Greek pessimism as the original form of nihilism, the
tragic realization that life is absurd and meaningless and
that uh. We are, as we are as individuals
or even as as a cultural societies, we are
insignificant in the grand ever changing flow of of
existence and so he looks at the pre-Platonic Greeks
as a model for, for these states. It's a
fact that the Greeks were pessimist and in many
ways the greatness came from this. They were able
to. See and accept the fundamental truth of life's
tragedy and they didn't look away from this harsh
reality they faced it head on and that was
part of what made their philosophy so profound. They
didn't run from the tragic nature of life they
embraced it. They didn't try to super code it
with comforting ideas, as did Socrates later, as did
Christian religion later, for example, and so. This is
a first nihilism before any philosophical or religious system
uh uh created later. To console us, so the
tragic Greeks remain open to suffering, to illness, and
they unveil the abyss, the paradox. Many times, let's
think about this in contemporary terms or events. The,
the events happening in our lives in the world,
for example, a, a, a pandemic, a devastating fire
or a flood, we just had a devastating flood
here in Valencia. They exceed our very limited human
power and that is the tragic insight of life
that Nietzsche vindicated. And so after let's say this
stage of Greek culture we moved to what Nietzsche
calls nihilistic ideas and these are the ideas of
European culture from Plato all the way to the
19th century and uh these ideas were built to
protect. Uh, TO protect ourselves from the tragic insect
of life, and that's why they are nihilistic because
they negate. The fundamental tragic insight of life with
these ideals, Nietzsche. Let's say includes Christianity, democracy, scientific
positivism, romanticism, his own romanticism in his youth. And
so this is where human when humanity starts to
build and construct things like Gods, truth, being, ideas
that Act as a defense mechanism against the tragic
experience of the first nihilism. They no longer, they
can no longer endure that tragic experience. They have
to conceal it with ideals such as God, truth,
being, etc. BEAUTY as well and so. Uh, IN
fact, Nietzsche argues that Christianity succeeded. He, uh, it
gained so much power because it, uh, it made
sense of suffering and evil. It offered the idea
of a perfect world and give and give meaning
to death. But of course these ideas were nihilistic
and with the uh. Their own will to truth
ultimately reveal themselves as uh false and so. The
fact is is that uh these annihilistic ideals instead
of accepting life as it was, they offered external
idealized views that cover up reality and Nietzsche's alternative,
however, was to embrace life as it is without
trying to impose some idealized meaning onto it, what
he called the innocence of becoming. And so to
conclude and to uh Let's say say it in
very briefly, it has 3 key dimensions. First is
a human condition, as I was saying, the fundamental
meaninglessness and absurdity of life. Secondly, uh, nihilism refers
to the nihilistic ideas that we create to shield
ourselves from that tragic truth. And third is the
event of the death of the God that I
already spoke about when the ideals, when those ideals
and values lose their authority.
And people sometimes describe Nietzsche himself as being nihilistic.
Was Nietzsche nihilistic or guilty of nihilism in any
way?
Well, that's a great question because it's uh it
truly is something that we hear constantly. Wasn't it
nihilistic? Oh yes he was or he wasn't, he
and to overcome nihilism, so. In my view, uh,
there's a key test to help answer this, and
it's the attempt of a self critique. It's a
new preface that he wrote. Uh FOR the Birth
of Tragedy, his first book, 13 years later, uh
after the original publication in 8687. So The attempted
a self critique is part of uh multiple new
prefaces that he wrote in those years to revisit
and republish his previous works and put them into
perspective to let's say uh clarify where he, where
he stands, what ideas remain and where his views
have changed. So these prefaces help us understand Nietzsche's
journey. And show us how his thought evolved over
time. And uh interestingly, that test uh is the
first time, the first uh Occurrence of the word
nihilism, not the death of God, nihilism in a
published text, not the posthumous fragment, a published text
by Nietzsche in life along with beyond good and
evil from the same year, so. Let's focus. The
thing is that in the attempt of the self
critique. He criticizes his past romantic quest to find
meaning, to find meaning as as if meaning was
something external like uh hiding behind the rock or
something like that, that his quest to find meaning
in life through art, uh, mostly Wagnerian art obviously
because uh he realizes that he in his youth,
he was not strong enough to. Endure the original
meaninglessness of life, the tragic insight of life. So
in the original edition of The Birth of Tragedy,
he was actually nihilistic. He had nihilistic ideas. He
was guilty of pursuing uh a nihilistic idea when
he looked to Schopenhauer's philosophy and Wagner's music as
a way to regenerate German culture and so. In
that new preface, he realizes that this very quest
for meaning, for, for meaning, this need for meaning
is the same sort of counseling idealism that he
criticizes in Christianity in Socrateism, it, it, let's say.
It plays the same credentive role and that's where
he, he acknowledges that he made a mistake. He
realizes that the uh this need for meaning often
amounts to an aversion to life and that's why
it's nihilistic because it's an aversion to life. It's
a rejection of the world as it is. It's
an inability to cope with the world as it
is. And so there, very interesting, interestingly, he argues
for a pessimism of strength. And so this is
the strength to embrace life's absurdity and the inherent
lack of meaning without turning to comforting metaphysical or
moral explanations, including Wagnerian art and so there we
see that what Nietzsche. It's actually suggesting what he's
pointing at is to learn to live within nihilism,
within that meaninglessness of life in a world without
inherent meaning. In, in fact, uh, uh, prominent niche
scholar, Wernic Stemeyer, he, he always puts it in
those terms. He speaks about orienting ourselves within nihilisms.
He speaks about, uh, Nietzsche's philosophy of orientation, not
overcoming but orientation, and so. To to sum it
up, Nietzsche was nihilistic in the sense that he
acknowledged the pessimistic conscience from the Greeks. He recognized
that the world doesn't align with our moral values,
that the truth, that the truth doesn't exist, for
instance, that's a pessimistic uh conscience, awareness, so. But
he's not nihilistic in the same way that Christian
ideals are or Wagner was romanticism was, so he
ultimately we need to live with this tragic insight
not to try to cover it it up. So
but instead of coming to terms with the pessimistic
conscience, so a truthful person, a truthful person. We
should recognize that the world does not conform to
our moral values and that is the nihilistic conscience
that Nietzsche vindicated.
Mhm. So, I mean, uh, how does nihilism manifest
in contemporary society?
Well, uh, It's important to understand. That while the
death of God involves breaking free from traditional authorities.
Nietzsche warned that it often leads people. To seek
new authorities, new sources of unconditional commands to provide
us with new goals and direction, so this is
like. A question like, uh, what happens after the
death of God? Where are we at? So. And,
and then again, we should. Going back to Nietzsche's
text, even before the announced of the death of
God in aphorism 125 of the gay Science, he
had already hinted at God's death in aphorism 108.
There he warned that even after God's death, his
shadows, quote unquote shadows that's the word would remain
he said God is dead, but as it is
the way of being with men there will perhaps
be caves for centuries in which the shadow will
show itself and we still have to defeat that
shadow and so. Uh, IF we pay attention to
these terms, we see that these shadows and caves,
these are obviously metaphors reminding us of Plato, and
they suggest that even after God is gone, people
continue to project their needs for authority. They, they
are still, let's say externalizing the same function, uh,
previously. Uh, PROVIDED by God. And so, Even after
God is done, uh, people may say, we may
say long for something or someone to provide them
with meaning, purpose, because after all, the loss of
a clear stable reference point like God it can
feel unbearable. Some people can't help but look for
new surrogates and replace God. With something that provides
the same sense of security and so We might
say that uh Europeans, people, etc. IT'S always awkward
to use these terms we whatever so uh they
remain attached to the idea of God even though
they can no longer believe in it. That's the
issue it's like uh. A self-referential situation in which
there's a difficult, it's difficult to find an exit
to it and so. Nietzsche's point is that after
the death of God, the faith in truth doesn't
necessarily disappear. We still have faith in the saving
power of truth. We might cling to this idea
that the truth can save us, even if it
comes from something other than God and so. We
might look for new systems, political, cultural, social that
stepping to fulfill the same role and Nietzsche warned
that idols such as the state, nationalism, race, the
market, science, etc. AND so uh. They can act
as shadows of God, they, because they offer omnipotent
myths and take care of the responsibility, uh, uh,
they, they take the responsibility of individuals to make
their own decisions, what he called self-legislation. And so
We can see for instance this dynamic playing in
various historical and political contexts. For instance, in their
analysis of the Nazi myths, uh, well-known text titled
The Nazi myths, uh, philosophers Philippe Laulabba and Jean
Lignani, they discussed how after the collapse of religious
transcendence. German culture found itself in kind of a
double bind. On the one hand, it was losing,
it was losing its religions and political structures, but
on the other it was drawn to romanticism and
nostalgia for medieval Christianity and. This creates a fertile
ground for the rise of Nazism which promised the
restoration of the sacred to things like I already
said, nationalism raised the idea of a unified people
and strong leader, etc. SO. In sociological terms we
might say that this was in part a response
to the nihilistic emptiness that people felt in the
wake of uh religious control loss. So when we
talk about nihilism today, we see its roost in
its sorry it's roots in this persistent struggle for
meaning after the death of God and how new
authorities often emerge to fill that void.
Uh, AND this nihilism also manifest in science and
technological advancement.
Yeah, absolutely. In fact, these shadows can surface in
politics, as I already say, science and even technology,
and Nietzsche uh uh explicitly criticize how social Darwinism
in the wake of the death of God position
itself. As a kind of new idol, he observed
that Darwinism owes to Christianity the foolish confidence in
the course of things for the better, let's say
it played the same functions in this sense, he.
Criticized that social Darwinism, inherited the Christian notion of
progress but reframe it with uh within a scientific
framework, a new, a new quote, uh, a new
way to legitimize it and so. He challenged those
authors, Herbert Spencer, Paul, etc. AND utilitarianism, John Stewart
me like, likewise, because he believed, obviously there are
multiple differences between these authors, but let's uh talkroomodo
as a group. He believed that they as a
group, social evolutionism and utilitarianism. They perpetuated the same
Christian values under a new guise, and the these
evolutionary ethics, according to him, to Nietzsche, they legitimized
the same moral framework but presented them as uh
rooted in evolutionary imperatives rather than the divine authority.
We know that uh Spencer upheld altruism, the same
values steeps in Christian morality, but framing it as
socially useful and so. Uh, THEY managed to maintain
its essential function, function as a shadow of God,
so. No, uh, supernatural authority was necessary. Instead, biological
imperatives dictated the same moral values acting thus of
the death of, sorry, as a shadow of God.
And so Uh, they managed to save our faith
in humanity, in, in human beings by prompting the
same values that echoed the same, uh, anthropological ideas
of Christianity and so. Uh, IT, uh, ultimately, as
I was saying, uh, at the beginning. When I
compare their original genealogies versus Nietzsche's genealogy, the problem
is that these evolutionary thinkers. Didn't uh challenge Christian
power structures like democracy or the church or morality
itself. It replaced one authority with another from the
divine to the biological and so. The problem is
that science, while obviously invaluable, er. It cannot determine
the value of values and that's uh a task
that lies beyond its domain and that's a key
idea. Of one of Nietzsche's fragments titled Anti-Darwin. So
Nietzsche criticized Darwinian morality for essentially really minimizing those
values and uh knowing, knowing that. The uh science.
Uh, THERE'S still faith in the saving power of
truth and, and there's still, uh, an eschatological vision
of progress in science. And so that's also one
of the main topics in the attempted self critique.
He questioned whether this excessive faith in science was
simply a defense mechanism against pessimism because it's evading
the truth of life, it's tragic insight. In, in,
there's a misplaced optimism perpetuating false promises. So Nietzsche's
thought challenges us to go beyond merely studying his
philosophy and instead, uh, it pushes us to adopt
his genealogical perspective and if we look at at
at today's world, let's say today's current movements, philosophical
movements, scientific movements, transhumanism represents an interesting case to
apply this nietzsche perspective. And as discussed in our
previous interview, transhumanism, we know is a philosophical and
intellectual movement advocating for the use of advanced technologies
to enhance. Our physical, cognitive, psychological capacities and For
example, to overcome our limitations, disease, aging, and even
death. And so at the core transhumanism envisions technology
as a means to transcend our biological constraints and
redefine, let's say the essence of humanity, but. If
we evaluate transhumanism from a niche lens, the uh
if we if we undertake that, that task, we
might raise important questions. For example, what moral framework
does it aim to establish? What are the values
that will dominate in such a, in a world
shaped by those principles and If we connect Nihilism
with uh transhumanist technologies. We might see that transhumanism
fails to grapple with the tragic insight of life
from the ancient Greeks. It intends to view the
human cognition negatively through the lens of this important
concept of biological constraints. And so we already spoke
in our previous interview about Sean Soner, an advocate
for so-called Nietzsche Transhumanism. He attempts to reframe transhumanism
as a life affirming project, a life aligned with
Nietzsche's values. And with Nietzsche's vision of self-overcoming, self-transcendence.
However, many Nietzsche scholars criticize that transhumanism can perpetuate
aesthetic ideals or nihilistic tendencies, and this highlights the
need for a deeper exploration. And, and not to
replicate the shadows of God or not to fall
into nihilism. And so we must ask whether transhumanism
carries forward nihilistic structures of religions without God, worship
without divinity, for instance, and whether this promise for
a better life functions as a new shadow of
God. The way I see it, uh, Nietzsche will
criticize this ingrained habit of seeking meaning from an
external source. And that persist and undermines our true
power for self-legislation that And so, uh, so-called niche
transhumanism and transhumanism in general because, uh, the mainstream
uh current in transhumanism doesn't at all uh connect
with ietzsche, like for instance. Uh, Nick Bostrom, he,
he, he rejects Nietzsche. He's, uh, instead utilitarian, but
the thing is transhumanism broadly understood should maybe. Ensure
that technology does not replace God's role in shaping
human values.
So one last question then, can nihilism be overcome?
Well, that's a perfect question to conclude and very
timely because In contemporary discussions of Nietzsche, especially in
the Anglophone world, it's become quite common to talk
about overcoming nihilism. However, uh, this idea wasn't introduced
by Nietzsche but later by Heidegger, and Heidegger's understanding
of nihilism differs significantly from Nietzsche's nihilism. And The
scholarly editions of Nietzsche's works and particularly the posthumous
fragments. WHICH are central to the topic of nihilism
because the published text. On nihilism are very, very
few. Uh, THESE editions have undergone substantial revisions and
advancements since Heidegger's time, and by this I mean
that. While Heidegger's interpretation remains influential, it should be
approached with caution because it reflects his own philosophical
ideas rather than a direct representation of Nietzsche's views
given obviously the limited uh resources available to him
when it comes to Nietzsche's corpus. So, Now entering
into Nietzsche, it's important to clarify that Nietzsche never
explicitly speaks of overcoming nihilism. Instead, he speaks a
few times of quote unquote the self overcoming of
nihilism and even then this idea only appears in
three unpublished notes and these notes notes are very
cryptic, under underdeveloped. They are. Essentially brief headings for
potential future writings like, OK, a chapter on the
self overcoming on nihilism and even then critically if
we think about it, the idea of uh nihilism
self overcoming itself is very different from the idea
of. Uh, A person, someone, let's say actively overcoming
nihilism, let's say the structure is different because by
the self overcoming of nihilism, Nietzsche would might have
been thinking about. The fact that er Christian ni
nihilistic ideas. HAD their own corruption ingrained in them
because of the will to truth. OK. So, can
nihilism be overcome? I believe that the answer depends
on the type of nihilism that we're talking about,
let's say the layer or the states. So nihilistic
ideals can indeed be overcome. In fact, as I've
just said, they are destined to be, uh, Christian
ideas, let's say, uh, our will to truth, etc.
OUR attachment to truth, uh, they compel us to
critically examine and dismantle contingent constructs of aesthetic ideas
and face us with the original nihilism of pessimism
and so. If we move forward to the next
stage, let's say the death of God and the
shadows of God, our dependence on external authorities and
the shadows of God, uh, and that can also
be overcome. However, if we go back to the
original foundation, the original layer of nihilism, nihilism as
a human condition. The deeper existential pessimism, the recognition
of life's tragic nature, and the fundamental meaninglessness, that's
something that cannot be overcome. In fact, The very
desire to overcome this kind of original nihilism is
in itself problematic. As I've said, uh, Nietzsche warns
that attempting to erase or escape this inherent absurdity
and randomness of existence. Often leads to heteronymous relationships.
For instance, uh, individuals can become instrumentalized in the
church, for instance, in political institutions, in fascism, etc.
IN the service of fanatism or uh dogmatic projects
and so. Even if Nietzsche does not speak of,
as I said again, overcoming nihilism. Uh In the
well known lets and hier fragment he does present
a situation that in practical terms I think could
amount to it or at least come close. He
argues that human power has grown to such an
extent that we should no longer need external consolation
to ease our despair that given our increasing control.
Over nature, for instance, we might put this, let's
say into question mark with all the climate disaster,
but our increasing control over nature thanks to technology,
for instance, uh, we should be able to live
with a diminished sense of value of uh. Of
human existence, for example, we should be able to
coexist in a society without relying on the theological
concept of human dignity, for instance, the idea that
humans are made in the image of God and
thus possess intrinsic value due to a connection to
the divine. We could find other immanent values. We
could ground them in in other perspectives to fulfill
that role of the unconditional and not because it's
true or false because that that doesn't matter. Nietzche,
as we know in beyond good and evil section
4, he says whether a judgment is, is, is
false, that's completely out of question. It doesn't matter.
The point is to assess. What role that judgment
er plays, whether it promotes life, whether it serves
our our development, whether it uh promotes life and
even leads to its selection and, and then that's
he uses yum or breeding so let's say that.
Uh, ONCE we move beyond this framework of, of,
let's say, uh, uh, through as a correspondence, the
foundation of the divine, etc. ETC. We might find
alternative ways to establish that social order without depending
on religious or metaphysical foundations. So we could offer
alternative foundations to it and in this sense, and
I will end with this. He distinguishes between the
weak and the strong in this context again in
the Lenzerheide fragment by weak, uh, he means, uh
those uh people who still seek re replacements for
the death god and they, they still seek a
new source of absolute meaning or redemption and instead
the strong, uh, on the other hand. Are those
who can endure life's absurdity without documents, and those
that affirm the absolute the meaninglessness of the world
and so seeing that meaninglessness not as a problem
to solve. But uh even uh as uh a
positive aspect of life, as I was saying, it
opens this up, it opens up a space for
pluralism, etc. ETC. And in fact, for Nietzsche, our
ability to transcend this absurdity without erasing it. Is
what defines our humanity. The original lack of meaning,
it will come out forever because nihilistic ideas will
fall one after the other and so the original
lack of meaning will constantly reappear and what defines
our essentially human experience is to try to endure
it and make sense of it. It's not actually
a question of overcoming nihilism but coming to terms
with it, not how to overcome, but how do
we respond to it. It's not, it's the fact
that Western culture traditionally shaped by Christian values. Could
take Nietzsche's advice to cultivate the pessimism of strength
and this means, uh, this means learning to live
as I was saying previously within nihilism to uh
come to terms with life's tragic vision instead of
seeking redemption or construct a new all-encompassing ideology and
so. It's about uh experiencing life's uncertainty and uh
and embracing the lack of ultimate meaning with, with
the increasing power that we hold over ourselves and
the world, we no longer need to depend as
heavily on moral, religious or philosophical constructs for comfort,
comfort. Today, Our challenge is to accept life's randomness
while finding ways to affirm and make sense of
it without denying the tragic aspects.
Great. So, Marin, uh, just before we go, would
you like to tell people again, like you did
last time where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Yeah, sure. So, uh, searching my name on Google,
you will easily find, uh, find me in all
the academic social networks like Research Gate, Field people,
academia.edu and uh you can easily reach me out
by email if you would like to talk or
maybe exchange publication, etc. I look forward to continue
the discussion.
Great. So thank you so much for coming on
the show again. It's always a pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berardo, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseralus and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant Juan and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearauuirrumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.